# 2023-04-26 Implementation Plan: Document all media properties in the catalog

<!-- See the implementation plan guide for more information: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/tree/19791f51c063d0979112f4b9f4eeace04c8cf5ff/docs/projects#implementation-plans-status-in-rfc -->
<!-- This template is exhaustive and may include sections which aren't relevant to your project. Feel free to remove any sections which would not be useful to have. -->

## Reviewers

<!-- Choose two people at your discretion who make sense to review this based on their existing expertise. Check in to make sure folks aren't currently reviewing more than one other proposal or RFC. -->

- [ ] @AetherUnbound
- [ ] @stacimc

## Project links

<!-- Enumerate any references to other documents/pages, including milestones and other plans -->

- [Project Thread](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/issues/412)
- [Project Proposal](https://docs.openverse.org/projects/proposals/document_all_media_properties/20230307-project_proposal.html#description)

## Overview

<!-- A brief one or two sentence overview of the implementation being described. -->

A proposal to create a documentation page with description of the media
properties collected by the Catalog.

## Background

The catalog collects and transforms data from many different sources. The kind
of data collected, transformations, and the expected data shape have changed
over time. This plan will outline the creation of the documentation page about
the media properties in the catalog. This will help answer some of the questions
like:

### User stories

- As a maintainer/contributor, I need to know the list of available properties
  for each media type in the catalog database. ... so that?
- As a contributor, I need to know what is the expected data type for the
  specific property. Is it required? ... so that?
- As a contributor, I need to know how the data property is transformed and
  validated.
- As a contributor writing a provider API script, which data properties do I
  need to collect?
- As a contributor writing a provider API script, how do I select data for the
  specific media property Openverse uses?
- As a contributor writing a provider script, which format should I convert a
  media property?
- As a maintainer, I've found a discrepancy between the type of data property
  the API returns and what is described in the table (e.g., is `null` for a
  non-nullable property). Is there an issue to fix this data in the catalog
  database, or do I need to create a new one?
- As an API user, I need to know what exactly this media property is and what
  data points from the providers are used for it. E.g., does the "creator" refer
  to the person who created the object or took the picture?
- As a provider of openly-licensed media, I want to know what media properties
  Openverse collects so that I can change my API responses.

The information on data types, transformations, and validations will be
presented as a table and will be extracted from the code. Other information
about the data selection properties and data discrepancies will be written in a
separate markdown file as it is easier to read, write, and lint.

The catalog has a DAG documentation generator that extracts the docstrings from
the DAGs and creates a page with the documentation. We can use the same approach
to create a documentation page for the media properties. The DAG doc generator
runs the code inside docker to extract DAG information because it requires the
project dependencies (i.e. `airflow`) in order to parse the DAG. In this
project, we can simplify and use the `ast` module to parse static code and
extract the docstrings to make the checks faster. This will, however, mean that
some of the settings will not be picked up and will have to be updated during
the generation. One example of this is the `nullable` field in the `Column`
class: it falls back to the value of `not nullable` during the object
initiation.

## Files

This project will create the following documents:

### `media_properties.md`

Located at `catalog/utilities/media_docs_gen/media_properties.md`. This is a
markdown file with the description of the media properties. This file is
manually written by the maintainers and contains the detailed information about
the shape and kind of data we expect to have for the property, how to select it
from the provider, and any inconsistencies between the data we have in the
database and the data we expect to have. This file is parsed in step 3 and the
information is added to the final page on the documentation site.

### `media_properties_documentation.md`

Located at `documentation/catalog/media_properties_documentation.md`. This is
markdown file generated by the `just` script and contains the preamble, the
tables with the data properties, and the long-form description of the properties
from `media_properties.md`. This file is used in the CI to compare the
newly-generated file to the existing one. If there are differences, the CI will
fail and the maintainers will need to update the documentation page.

### `generate_media_properties_documentation.py`

Located at
`catalog/utilities/media_docs_gen/generate_media_properties_documentation.py`.
This is a Python script that parses the SQL DDL files, Python files, and the
`media_properties.md` file to generate the `media_properties_documentation.md`
file. This script is run by the `just` script.

## Outlined Steps

### `just` script

The script parses the SQL DDL files, Python files and markdown files to generate
a markdown page with a table and long-form notes. This script can `diff` with
the existing documentation page (created in step 4 below) for the `precommit`
check and post a note about how to update the docs if differences are detected.

### 1. SQL DDL parsing

We will use the names of the properties as they are in the upstream database, in
the same order as they are in the `image_view`/`audio_view` materialized views.
These views are selected over the main `image` and `audio` tables because they
are used by the API during data refresh and contain a complete list of
properties.

A Python script is written to extract the information from the SQL files into a
mapping with the name of the media property and the following values: SQL
datatype, and SQL constraints. More data will be added to this mapping in the
further steps.

### 2. Parsing of the Python code

The `Column` class and its child classes describe the validations we use to
write the data collected by provider scripts. The `add_item` method has
docstrings with short descriptions of what each property is. The information
from these items will be added into the mapping from step 1.

### 3. Adding the long-form information from the markdown file

The markdown file will be parsed and split into the preamble, postamble (???)
and the information about each data property. This information would be added to
the `description` in the property mapping.

### 4. Writing the markdown file

The mapping will be used to create a new markdown file: the Preamble, the tables
for Audio and Image, the long-form document from step 3.

### Information to include in `media_properties.md` for each property

Media types: Image, Audio Short description Names used in the provider scripts,
if different from the database name Shape of the object (if it is not a simple
type) Selection criteria Normalization and validation performed in the
`MediaStore` class and the relevant `Column` Inconsistencies in the database
data See sample for `identifier` and `tags` in `sample_media_properties.md`

## Dependencies

We can use the Python standard library as possible for this project.

## Alternative (or additional) Approaches

We could also create a list of classes/functions that are used to transform the
data and run a `git diff` on them to see if there are any changes. This would be
a more manual approach and would require more maintenance.

Another option for documenting the media properties is to pass a dataclass
instead of the named parameters to the `add_item` method of the `ImageStore` and
`AudioStore`. This would make the documentation closer to code for easier
updating, and have another benefit of allowing us to check for required
properties sooner. However, this would require a lot of refactoring and if
decided on, would need to be a separate project.

## Samples

### `media_properties.md`

```markdown
# Title

The title of the work. If blank, uses "This work" for the attribution sentence
(This work by creator is licensed with CC BY). Shape of the data and Selection
criteria

We select the default title returned by the provider. It can be blank. Blank
values (whether None or empty string "") are saved as empty string in the
database (TODO: check if this is true). Existing data problems

Some media items had incorrectly encoded titles [^1 - Link to a description of
Unicode encoding problem in the "postamble"]. This is compensated for in the
Frontend (link to the code that fixes title encoding). This problem has been
fixed for the items that have been reingested after some time in 2020, but might
still persist for items that were not updated since then. Link to issues for
fixing the encoding in the catalog/api/frontend. Some Wikimedia titles have a
shape of "FILE:xxx.svg". The provider script removes them now, but this is still
a problem for items that were ingested earlier. The "FILE" and ".extension" are
removed in the frontend (link to the code). Link to the issue to fix it in the
API.
```

### `media_properties_documentation.md`

```markdown
# Openverse Media Properties

preamble (copied from general.md)

## Overview of the media properties

table with the datatype details, possibly with links to the headings below.
Autogenerated in steps 1-2.

## In-depth description

`identifier`

Description of the identifier field. Step 3 reads the manually-written
media_properties.md file, splits it by the media property, and then writes it
here in the correct order. title

description

## Other considerations (postamble)

### Encoding problems

Description of what happened with encoding of tags and titles
```
