# Project Proposal: Providing and maintaining an Openverse image dataset

**Author**: @zackkrida

## Reviewers

<!-- Choose two people at your discretion who make sense to review this based on their existing expertise. Check in to make sure folks aren't currently reviewing more than one other proposal or RFC. -->

- [ ] @AetherUnbound
- [ ] @stacimc

## Project summary

This project aims to publish and regularly update a dataset of Openverse' image
metadata. This project will provide access to the data currently served by our
API, but which is difficult to access in full and requires significant time and
resources.

## Motivation

For this project, understanding "why?" we would do this is of paramount
importance. There are several key philosophical and technical advantages to
sharing this dataset with the public.

### Open Access

Openverse is and always has been, since its days as
["CC Search"](https://creativecommons.org/2021/12/13/dear-users-of-cc-search-welcome-to-openverse/),
informed by principles of the open access movement. Openverse has strived to
remove all all financial, technical, and legal barriers to accessing the works
of the global commons.

Due to technical and logistical limitations, we have previously been unable to
accessibly provide access to the full Openverse dataset. Currently, users need
to invest significant time and money into scraping the Openverse API. These
financial and technical barriers to our users are deeply inequitable.

By sharing this data as a full dataset on
[HuggingFace](https://huggingface.co/datasets), we can remove these barriers to
access and allow folks to access the data provided by Openverse.org and the
Openverse API without restriction.

The metadata for openly-licensed media, used by Openverse to power the API and
frontend, is a community utility and should be available to all users,
distinctly from Openverse itself. By publishing this dataset, we ensure access
to this data is fast, accessible, and resilient.

## Goals

<!-- Which yearly goal does this project advance? -->

This project encompasses all of our 2023 "lighthouse goals", but "Community
Development" is perhaps the broadest and most relevant. Others touched on here,
or impacted through potential downstream changes, are "Result Relevancy",
"Quantifying our Work","Search Experience", "Content Safety", and "Data
inertia".

I'll explain _how_ this project may impact those goals in subsequent sections.

## Requirements

<!-- Detailed descriptions of the features required for the project. Include user stories if you feel they'd be helpful, but focus on describing a specification for how the feature would work with an eye towards edge cases. -->

## Success

<!-- How do we measure the success of the project? How do we know our ideas worked? -->

## Participants and stakeholders

<!-- Who is working on the project and who are the external stakeholders, if any? Consider the lead, implementers, designers, and other stakeholders who have a say in how the project goes. -->

## Infrastructure

<!-- What infrastructural considerations need to be made for this project? If there are none, say so explicitly rather than deleting the section. -->

## Accessibility

<!-- Are there specific accessibility concerns relevant to this project? Do you expect new UI elements that would need particular care to ensure they're implemented in an accessible way? Consider also low-spec device and slow internet accessibility, if relevant. -->

## Marketing

<!-- Are there potential marketing opportunities that we'd need to coordinate with the community to accomplish? If there are none, say so explicitly rather than deleting the section. -->

## Required implementation plans

<!-- What are the required implementation plans? Consider if they should be split per level of the stack or per feature. -->
